+++
title = "QLS Guide"
css = "constitution.css"
+++

# The QLS Student Guide

## McGill Platforms

### Minerva

[Minerva Login](https://horizon.mcgill.ca)  
[How to log into Minerva](https://www.mcgill.ca/minerva-guests/minerva-login)

Minerva allows you to access McGill's central information system through several menus:

1. Personal Menu
    * Update personal information (name, SIN, addresses, phone numbers, e-mail, McGill
      passwords…)

    * COVID-19 Self-Reporting form (for employees and student employees)

2. Student Menu
    * Select curriculum, add/drop courses, view unofficial transcript, order official
      transcripts, tax receipts…

3. Employee Menu
    * Direct deposit information, staff training registration, submit an…

4. Applicant Menu
    * Application for admissions

5. Financial Aid & Awards menu

### myCourses

[myCourses login](https://mycourses2.mcgill.ca/)  
[Resources regarding myCourses](https://www.mcgill.ca/mycourses/)

On myCourses, students can see all ongoing and previous courses and access their content
(for as long as the instructor leaves them up). Grades for assignments and exams are also
posted here. Note however, that the final grade for the course is the one appearing in
your transcripts in Minerva (under Student Menu). 

### myProgess

[Login to myProgess](https://horizon.mcgill.ca/myprogress)  
[Resources about myProgress](
    https://www.mcgill.ca/gps/myprogress/students-and-supervisors)

MyProgress is a great tool for Ph.D. students as it allows you to track important and
upcoming degree milestones and upload relevant documents (such as the LOU, progress
tracking forms…).

### myThesis

[Login to myThesis](https://mythesis.mcgill.ca/)  
[Resources about MyThesis](
    https://www.mcgill.ca/gps/thesis/thesis-guidelines/initial-submission/what-mythesis)

myThesis is part of the myProgress hub. Through myThesis, students are required to notify
supervisors of their intent to submit their thesis, nominate thesis examiners and submit
their initial thesis (before the Oral Defence). 

## Program Requirements

[Program requirements on the McGill website](
    https://www.mcgill.ca/qls/program-requirements)

The Quantitative Life Sciences PhD Program is a novel inter-department and inter-faculty
program designed to produce the next generation of leaders in the rapidly changing world
of biology, medicine, and biotechnology. This program has been designed from the ground-up
with close consultation with all stakeholders to produce graduates with the quantitative
and interdisciplinary skills that Quebec and Canada need to maintain their positions as
world-leaders in biology and life-science research.

The general objective of the PhD Program in Quantitative Life Science is to educate
students who are at the cutting edge of quantitative approaches (technological,
computational, and statistical) for the collection, analysis, and interpretation of
complex data from life sciences. Our students will ask questions that will drive biology
and medicine tomorrow, and will be equipped to answer them. Research domains can encompass
any level of life science, from molecules to ecosystems.  

The PhD Program requirements include coursework, research seminars, a lab rotation
program, annual advisory committee meetings, a comprehensive exam, a research thesis and
an oral defence.

### Coursework

In the first year, students are required to take QLSC 600 _Foundations of Quantitative
Life Sciences_, a two-semester, six-credit course. QLSC 600 provides an overview of
important problems in the life sciences and introduces students to the latest
computational, mathematical, and statistical approaches involved in their solution. The
course includes a survey of modern technologies for biological data acquisition and
promotes a common language to communicate across the biological, physical, mathematical,
and computational sciences.

Students are also required to take a minimum of 9 credits of complementary courses,
including 3-6 credits of life science courses and 3-6 credits of quantitative courses.
The choice of the complementary courses will be made by the student in consultation with
their supervisor/advisory committee.

### Lab Rotations

Students will spend their first year rotating through three different research groups led
by different supervisors. Rotations are mandatory in QLS, and students will be strongly
encouraged to do rotations in a variety of domains. During this time, they will either
undertake a short-term research project, or assist with a longer-term project, and will be
expected to work at their rotation labs full time, with the exception of QLS-related
activities such as courses or seminars. When possible, the rotations will be selected to
be complementary.

### Research Seminars

Each week during the academic year, QLS, in conjunction with CAMBAM, MiCM and the Ludmer
Centre, holds a research seminar featuring high-profile invited speakers. Attendance at 
these seminars is mandatory. You will need to register for QLSC 601 D1/D2, QLSC 602 D1/D2,
and QLSC 603 D1/D2 during your first three years in the program.

### QLS Annual Research Day

The QLS Annual Research Day is an internal conference-type event, usually held around late
January/ early February. All QLS students are expected to attend the Research Day and
selected students also give a 15mins oral presentation on their research. Typically, the
day begins with an hour-long talk from the keynote speaker. This is followed by the
student presentations. Varying student workshops (e.g.: effective presentation skills,
career panel for students, Q&A with post-docs and professors…) followed by a social hour
generally conclude the QLS Annual Research Day. 

[See presentations from 2022](
    https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLCCQ0xdlWGLB-NHpxc01ieGTaDvQP74nw)

### Advisory Committee Meetings

After the first year, students will choose their supervisor or co-supervisors. Then
together, they will choose a thesis advisory committee ensuring that both quantitative and
life science disciplines are represented. The committee will help the student prepare for
the comprehensive examination and will meet at least annually.

### Comprehensive Exam

Students will be required to pass a comprehensive exam before the end of their second
year. The comprehensive exam consists of the three components: a written proposal, an oral
presentation of the proposal, and an oral examination assessing breadth and depth of
knowledge by their examination committee.

### Thesis Requirements

[McGill thesis guidelines](
    https://www.mcgill.ca/gps/thesis/thesis-guidelines/general-requirements)

The thesis expectations follow the guidelines established by Graduate and Postdoctoral
Studies at McGill. In general, the thesis must demonstrate a mastery of appropriate
research as well as contributing original scholarship relating to the area of
specialization. A thesis for the doctoral degree must constitute original scholarship and
must be a distinct contribution to knowledge. It must show familiarity with previous work
in the field and must demonstrate ability to plan and carry out research, organize
results, and defend the approach and conclusions in a scholarly manner. The research
presented must meet current standards of the discipline; as well, the thesis must clearly
demonstrate how the research advances knowledge in the field. Finally, the thesis must be
written in compliance with norms for academic and scholarly expression and for publication
in the public domain (see section: withholding a thesis from circulation temporarily). The
nature of academic research requires adherence to McGill’s policies on research ethics and
intellectual property, as described below.

### Oral Defence

An oral examination of the content and implications of the thesis will be held in a public
forum to determine the quality of the written thesis document and the student’s oral
defence of the thesis.

## Program Milestones

### 1st Year

QLS students are expected to do 3 rotations in different labs in the Fall, Winter and
Summer semesters of their first year in the program. Students can use these rotations to
explore new fields, learn specific methods and/or visit different lab environments at
McGill. At the end of each rotation, first year QLS student present their project in the
form of a 3-Minute Thesis competition, judged by all the other upper-class students (3MTs
are also held at the university and national level! Visit
https://www.mcgill.ca/skillsets/offerings/3mt for more). 

All QLS students are required to take the year-long course [QLSC 600](
https://www.mcgill.ca/qls/courses). QLSC 600 is split between the Fall (QLSC 600 D1) and
Winter (QLSC 600 D2) semesters. Each semester is then divided into 3-4 modules covering
different topics in bioinformatics and computational genomics, nonlinear dynamics in
biological systems, linear and nonlinear models of biological signals, biophysical imaging
technology, emergent behaviour in biophysical networks, and ecosystem dynamics and
modelling.

Prerequisite courses to the program, such as MATH324: Statistics, should also be taken
within the first year of the program. 

First year QLS students are also expected to attend and participate in the weekly seminars
given by QLS in conjunction with CAMBAM, MiCM and the Ludmer Centre. The seminars appear
as QLSC601D1/D2 in Minerva for 1st years. 

Finally, as students complete their first year in the QLS Ph.D. program, they should think
about (and eventually choose!) a doctoral project and principal investigator(s). As such,
the Letter Of Understanding should be signed by the student and PI(s) by the end of the
1st year in the program.

### 2nd Year

Following a year of exploration, the 2nd year QLS student should have a better idea of the
direction their doctoral project will take. By the end of December of the Fall semester of
the 2nd year, students should have built and submitted to the QLS Director their PhD
Advisory Committee and a list of about 20 articles for their Comprehensive Examination. By
the end of April of the Winter semester of their 2nd year, QLS students should have had
their 1st Supervisory Committee, also serving as an oral project proposal. 

Second year QLS students are also expected to attend and participate in the weekly
seminars given by QLS in conjunction with CAMBAM, MiCM and the Ludmer Centre. The seminars
appear as QLSC602D1/D2 in Minerva for 2nd years. 

### 3rd Year

By the end of December of the Fall semester of the 3rd year, students should have taken
their Comprehensive Examination. If the Comprehensive Exam is taken in the 3rd year, the
student will not need to hold another Supervisory Committee Meeting/Progress Tracking for
the year. If, however, the Comprehensive Examination was taken in the summer of the 2nd
year, or earlier, the 3rd year QLS student will need to hold another Supervisory Committee
Meeting/Progress Tracking during the year.

Third year QLS students are also expected to attend and participate in the weekly seminars
given by QLS in conjunction with CAMBAM, MiCM and the Ludmer Centre. The seminars appear
as QLSC603D1/D2 in Minerva for 3rd years. 

### 4th Year and +

For the 4th year, and each year following, QLS students are expected to hold at least one
Supervisory Committee Meeting/Progress Tracking each year.

QLS students at this level are not required to attend the seminars, however it is greatly
encouraged!!

### Final Year

Once the QLS student has completed all required courses (QLS600D1/D2, 3-6 credits in life
Science and 3-6 credits in quantitative courses) and written their thesis, they can send
their Initial Thesis Submission on [myThesis](
https://www.mcgill.ca/gps/thesis/thesis-guidelines/initial-submission/). Then, along with
the Thesis Advisory Committee they will set up a time and location for the Oral Defence.
Once the student has passed their Oral Defence, they can proceed to the final thesis
submission.

## QUALSA

QUALSA is the **Qua**ntitative **L**ife **S**ciences **A**ssociation. We are a team of six
dedicated QLS students aiming to provide you a well-rounded social and academic experience
during your time at McGill. We organize regular social events and provide platforms for
student to share and discuss various research topics in peer-review sessions. We also
represent the QLS student body at the Post-Graduate Student Society (PGSS, QUALSA’s parent
organization) councils and during meetings with the administration. Together with the QLS
administration, QUALSA also helps organize the Annual QLS Research Day. QUALSA’s council
positions include:

* President
* Chair Secretariat
* VP Finance
* VP Academic
* VP Social
* VP External 

Social events:
* Board game nights at Thomson House every 2nd Wednesday of the month. 
* Personalized QLS Sweatshirts and accessories.
* Annual winter formal with other life science departments at McGill.
* BBQs, intramural sports, excursions to some of Montreal’s espace pour la vie centres. 

Academic services: 
* QUALSA workshop series
* Organizing practice sessions for comprehensive exams and/or thesis defences. 
* Grant and thesis writing support groups.